Background

The potential spatial access to urban health services is an important issue in health geography, spatial epidemiology and public health. Computing geographical accessibility measures for residential areas (e.g. census tracts) depends on a type of distance, a method of aggregation, and a measure of accessibility. The aim of this paper is to compare discrepancies in results for the geographical accessibility of health services computed using six distance types (Euclidean and Manhattan distances; shortest network time on foot, by bicycle, by public transit, and by car), four aggregation methods, and fourteen accessibility measures.
Methods

To explore variations in results according to the six types of distance and the aggregation methods, correlation analyses are performed. To measure how the assessment of potential spatial access varies according to three parameters (type of distance, aggregation method, and accessibility measure), sensitivity analysis (SA) and uncertainty analysis (UA) are conducted.
Results


First, independently of the type of distance used except for shortest network time by public transit, the results are globally similar (correlation >0.90). However, important local variations in correlation between Cartesian and the four shortest network time distances are observed, notably in suburban areas where Cartesian distances are less precise. Second, the choice of the aggregation method is also important: compared with the most accurate aggregation method, accessibility measures computed from census tract centroids, though not inaccurate, yield important measurement errors for 10% of census tracts. Third, the SA results show that the evaluation of potential geographic access may vary a great deal depending on the accessibility measure and, to a lesser degree, the type of distance and aggregation method. Fourth, the UA results clearly indicate areas of strong uncertainty in suburban areas, whereas central neighbourhoods show lower levels of uncertainty.
Conclusion

In order to accurately assess potential geographic access to health services in urban areas, it is particularly important to choose a precise type of distance and aggregation method. Then, depending on the research objectives, the choices of the type of network distance (according to the mode of transportation) and of a number of accessibility measures should be carefully considered and adequately justified.

The SA results allowed us to show that the evaluation of potential geographic access may vary a great deal depending on the accessibility measure and, to a lesser degree, the type of distance and aggregation method. This is not surprising, as the 14 accessibility measures selected refer to conceptualizations of potential geographic access that are very different from one another. The choice of this parameter should thus be given considerable attention and have a specific justification as it helps to make the results vary substantially. It is then relevant to calculate several measures that enable potential geographic access to be described in all its complexity. For example, measures based on both supply and demand dimensions (2SFCA and gravity models) are better adapted to general, large-size services (e.g. hospitals), whereas measures of immediate proximity or cumulative opportunities are more suited to describing less common, specialized services (specialized centres). Moreover, these cumulative opportunity measures are especially well adapted to describing the supply of services within an immediate environment (within one mile, for example). That is why they are often used in health studies on food deserts or the food environments around schools. It should also be remembered that these accessibility measures produce variables that may be either continuous or discrete, which may result in a particular one being chosen in keeping with the study design.

Although the choice of the type of distance has less impact on the results obtained, it clearly interacts to a certain extent with the measure of accessibility. The interactions between these two sources of uncertainty generate more variation than the method of aggregation alone. For example, in 2SFCA methods, the catchment areas may be either larger or smaller depending on the type of distance chosen (car travelers can go further than pedestrians), and the same goes for measures that count the number of services within a specific radius. So this choice also requires careful consideration, in taking into account possible interactions with the latter measure.

Moreover, although Cartesian distances (Euclidean and Manhattan) are strongly correlated with the four network distances, local variations are nonetheless observed, notably in suburban areas. Given that it has become much easier to calculate network distances—because of free access to geographical data and highly effective tools (GIS or online services)—the use of Cartesian distances in urban areas is no longer preferable today. Indeed, the time required for the computation of numerous network distances is no longer a limitation.

Another aspect should be mentioned concerning the comparison of the types of distance. The correlations have been shown to be weaker between public transit and other network distances. This can be explained by the unequal distribution of public transport (especially the subway) across the study area. The same remark also applies, although to a lesser extent, to cycling infrastructure. We also found strong correlations between network distances on foot, by bicycle and by car, which might lead one to believe that using one or the other of these types of distance comes down to applying a simple multiplying factor, which is not the case. The impact of topography on pedestrians’ or cyclists’ speeds is much greater than for car drivers. In a city with a more pronounced topography (e.g. San Francisco, La Paz), these correlations would certainly have been weaker. Finally, the correlations with Cartesian distances were also weaker for peripheral areas than for central areas. In the Montreal context, this is in part explained by the presence of the bridges that link the Island to the North and South shores. In comparison, if we had conducted the study in the New York City area, the local correlations between Cartesian versus network types of distance would probably have been very high for census tracts on the island of Manhattan, and weaker for those located in Brooklyn, Queens, Staten Island and Jersey City because of the bridges.

Finally, although the influence of the aggregation method is fairly marginal globally, we have nonetheless shown that errors in accuracy caused by the lack of an aggregation method can be important locally, especially in suburban areas, where census tracts mostly have lower population densities and where land use is largely non-residential. Because the accessibility of health services may be more problematic in suburban areas than in more central urban areas, geographical accessibility studies should be based on the most accurate aggregation method. The question of the use of an aggregation method is especially important when accessibility measures calculated on the level of census tracts are introduced as dependent variables into models for predicting health outcomes. Consider the classic example of a multilevel model with individual variables (level 1), socioeconomic variables and measures of the accessibility of health services or health-related resources at the census tract level (level 2). If the accessibility measures are not calculated by using an aggregation method—in other words, if they are obtained by only using the census tract centroids—that could lead to errors or lack of precision in the estimation of the impact of the accessibility of health services or health-related resources on health.
Conclusion

This article evaluates the potential geographic access to urban health services using 14 accessibility measures, six types of distance and four aggregation methods. Based on these three parameters, 336 indicators of geographic access at the census tract level have been obtained. A sensitivity analysis has shown that the parameters that create the greatest variation in the evaluation of potential geographic access are, in descending order: the accessibility measures and, to a far lesser extent, the type of distance and the aggregation method used. An uncertainty analysis also made it possible to show that inaccuracies in the evaluation of geographic access are much greater in the suburbs than in central neighbourhoods.

In sum, in order to accurately assess potential geographic access to health services in urban areas, it is particularly important to choose a precise type of distance and aggregation method so as to limit inaccuracies in measurements. Then, depending on the research question and/or research objectives, the choices of the type of network distance (according to the mode of transportation) and of a number of accessibility measures should be carefully considered and adequately justified.